docs(Features): High Level design for Feature tagging (#1338)
Vizzuality/marxan-cloud: docs/features/tagging/high-level-design.md

the shape file will be tagged with the same tag**.

It should not be empty and should be validated to not to exceed the configurable maximum number of characters allowed
for tag names.

In order to maintain capitalization uniqueness, a check is made first to see if there is already a case insensitive
match with a previously existing tag for the same Project with `projectId`. If so, that tag will be used instead of the
tag provided in the payload.

- `DELETE /api/v1/geo-features/:featureId/tags/`

Removes the tag for the given `featureId`. This means removing the corresponding row on the `feature_tags` table.

## Tag Managing

These endpoints deal with tag managing operations on a per Project level.

- `GET /api/v1/projects/:projectId/tags?tag=someName`

For the given `projectId`, returns a list of all the DISTINCT tags from the Project's Features that partially matches
the `tag` query parameter. By default, the matching is `containing`, but other options could be considered.

The `tag` query parameter may be optional, so that if it is empty, all the DISTINCT tags for the given `projectId` are
returned.

> Ordered alphabetically by default.

Reviewer: Will be possible other sorting values? Like `most-recent` or similar. Per design, the default view when the user is about to type a tag is displaying the most recent tags introduced, so it would be ideal having this use case as well.

<img width="549" alt="image" src="https://github.com/Vizzuality/marxan-cloud/assets/999124/9e18cfa5-84a3-4a98-ae25-cda8672ffb95">

`| rowId (VARCHAR) | projectId (VARCHAR) | featureId (VARCHAR) | tag (VARCHAR) |`

where:

- **rowId** is a generated UUID PK
- **projectId** is a foreign key referencing the PK of the Projects table with ON DELETE CASCADE set. Cannot be NULL.
- **featureId** is a foreign key referencing the PK of the Features table with ON DELETE CASCADE set. Cannot be NULL.
- **tag** contains the tag string itself, **case sensitive**, and cannot be NULL or empty. If a feature doesn't have
  any tags for a given project, then no rows associated to it should be present.
- There will be an **UNIQUE INDEX** on the combination of **`projectId` and `featureId`**. This will limit the number of
  tags to **1 tag per feature**.
- There will be an **UNIQUE INDEX** on the combination of **`projectId` and `LOWER(tag)`** in order to enforce
  **capitalization uniqueness** of the tag names

On the DB side, the size the `tag` is unbounded, but is bounded at the service level via validation by a configurable
amount of
max characters.

Once the last feature with a given tag is removed or untagged, that tag won't be available to be selected as a tag

> anymore. Tags will be considered removed when there are no rows for a given `projectId` and `featureId` combination

Reviewer 2: maybe for extra clarity?

```suggestion
anymore. Tags will be considered removed from a project when there are no rows for a given `projectId` and `featureId` combination
```

with a given tag name.

**Capitalization uniqueness should be enforced at the service level**. When tagging/renaming a tag on a feature, a case
insensitive check must be made first to see if there's an already existing tag, regardless of capitalization, and use

> that tag instead of the one provided by the user. For example, if an user tags a Feature with `Mogwai`, and other

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that tag instead of the one provided by the user. For example, if a user tags a Feature with `Mogwai`, and other
```

features for the same project are already tagged with `mogwai` instead, `mogwai` should be used as the new tag. However

> this capitalization uniqueness **should not be applied tag renames for a given project** as the user might want to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this capitalization uniqueness **should not be applied when renaming tags for a given project** as the user might want to
```

change capitalization of an existing tag.

Some other solutions considered were JSONB Arrays or an Array of text values, as an extra column on the `features`
table, containing all the tags in plain text form. Although these are better performant solutions in some use cases (tag
cloud generation, tag combination querying...), given the scope, budget and data volume, a more classic solution based
on an external table with JOINs is enough for this case.

More info on different tagging implementation approaches [here](http://www.databasesoup.com/2015/01/tag-all-things.html)

These are some of the main criteria used for deciding on the external table solution:

> - **All tag managing operations are done per project**: this limits quite a bit the number rows that queries must

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **All tag managing operations are done per project**: this limits quite a bit the number of rows that queries must
```

  handle, since doing system wide queries are not contemplated.
- **System wide features are non-taggable**.
- **Low volume of feature entries**: each project will have features in the hundreds, low thousands at most.
- **Low number of tag entries**: the initial requirement is to have a max of 1 tag per feature; it is plausible to
  assume that even in the case that this limitation is expanded upon, the possible number of tags per feature would be
  in the low tens.
- **One tag per feature**: queries are further simplified because there won't be querying for tag combinations
- **The original `features` table remains the same**
- **Budget**

## Workflow

There are two distinct parts to the tagging system.

### Feature tagging operations

> These endpoints deal with operating tags for an individual feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These endpoints deal with handling tags for an individual feature.
```

- `PATCH /api/v1/geo-features/:featureId/tags`

```typescript
Payload
{

> 	projectId: string

Reviewer 2: we can decide at implementation time, but I think we can safely leave out `projectId` here because we would need to look it up in any case, as "parent" project of the feature the user wants to edit, as we need the "real" `projectId` anyway in order to process ACLs (we can't rely on a user-supplied `projectId` for this).

Author: You mean doing a quick load of the feature metadata to retrieve its projectId right? Yeah, that could work too, and shouldn't be much of an overhead. We'll see when we get to it.

match with a previously existing tag for the same Project with `projectId`. If so, that tag will be used instead of the
tag provided in the payload.

- Extend `POST /api/v1/projects/:id/features/shapefile`

The `UploadShapefileDTO` should be expanded to also accept an optional tag field, so that **all Features created from
the shape file will be tagged with the same tag**.

It should not be empty and should be validated to not to exceed the configurable maximum number of characters allowed
for tag names.

In order to maintain capitalization uniqueness, a check is made first to see if there is already a case insensitive
match with a previously existing tag for the same Project with `projectId`. If so, that tag will be used instead of the
tag provided in the payload.

- `DELETE /api/v1/geo-features/:featureId/tags/`

Removes the tag for the given `featureId`. This means removing the corresponding row on the `feature_tags` table.

## Tag Managing

These endpoints deal with tag managing operations on a per Project level.

- `GET /api/v1/projects/:projectId/tags?tag=someName`

> For the given `projectId`, returns a list of all the DISTINCT tags from the Project's Features that have a tag that
> partially matches with `tag`. By default, the matching is `containing`, but other options could be considered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the given `projectId`, returns a list of all the DISTINCT tags from the Project's Features that
partially matche the `tag` query parameter. By default, the matching is `containing`, but other options could be considered.
```

Reviewer 2: I think we want the `tag` query param to be optional too, right? so that users can use `GET /api/v1/projects/:projectId/tags` to get the list of all the tags currently available within the given project.

Ordered alphabetically by default.

No pagination required, since the possible number of tags per Project will be in the low tens.

- `DELETE /api/v1/projects/:projectId/tags/`

```typescript
Payload
{
	tag: string;
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: A payload on a DELETE may be risky: although it should work _in practice_, we don't fully control the whole HTTP stack in production/staging and as such... I would discourage this.

I'd either use the uuid of the tag to delete (which is a bit of an extra pain to get and use, but allows to limit the URL to ASCII) or the name of the tag (maybe urlencoded to avoid having to trust that all layers of the HTTP stack correctly handle unicode in URLs?)

Reviewer 2: For context, see https://stackoverflow.com/a/299696. ChatGPT also invites to be cautious 😬

Author: Yeah, thinking back on it, I totally agree.
However, I think using the uuid of the tag wouldn't be correct, because that identifies a single instance of a given tag for that project. If you have multiple features with the same tag, using the uuid it's going to delete the tag for one feature.
Using the tag text as a query parameter, urlencoded as  you say, would most likely be the way to go.

Reviewer 2: of course, you are very right. perfect as in your latest commit 👍🏼

# Feature Tagging (High-Level Design)

The selected solution for this feature is to implement a new table `feature_tags` on the API DB that will hold, for each
row, a tag for a given combination of feature and project id like this:

> `| rowId (uuid) | projectId (uuid) | featureId (uuid) | tag (VARCHAR) | last_applied (timestamp) |`

Reviewer 2: from the rest of the text, I suppose you meant

```suggestion
`| rowId (uuid) | projectId (uuid) | featureId (uuid) | tag (VARCHAR) | last_updated (timestamp) |`
```

It's just a tiny implementation detail, in any case (and maybe at implementation time I'd suggest to stick to the same name we have for similar columns already, that is `last_modified_at timestamp without timezone default now()`)

Author: Good catch, I'll change it later.
